the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
ok let's just take 10 more seconds
okay
does someone want to explain the answer
here give it a try um so it says in the
problem that the X rays have the same
wavelength so you know that they also
have the same frequency so that
discounts one two and five and six so
then it's just a choice between three
and four and in like the video the other
day you said in order to like say to
image these proteins you need a high
intensity light so three yep that's a
great explanation here I don't really
know what these these might come in
handy today I don't know okay yeah so
the trick was sort of better quality
data so you probably figured out that
that then was the higher intensity so
this is this is a true thing so we have
data collection there's equipment here
at home and a lot of universities have
what they call home data collection
equipment but we often travel to
synchrotrons where we have higher
intensity ie more photons per second and
then you get better quality data and so
these are sometimes people do these
things remotely where you ship your
samples and someone else collects it but
my lab likes to go and you stay up all
night and collect great data and it's
it's a bonding experience you saw a
little bit that of that on the video
okay we ended last time looking at the
Schrodinger equation and seeing that the
Schrodinger equation could be solved for
a hydrogen atom giving information about
binding energy the binding of electron
to its nucleus and also a wave function
which we haven't talked about yet so
we're going to continue talking about
this binding energy and then next week
we're gonna move into wave functions or
orbitals so the binding energy that
comes out of the Schrodinger equation no
one should ever just kind of believe
things it looks fancy but you know does
it really
is it really doing this right estimation
and again it just kind of came out of
Schrodinger's mind so it's always nice
to verify that this equation is is
working pretty well so today we're going
to talk about how we were able to verify
that the binding energy that the
Schrodinger equation was predicting
actually agrees with experiment so we're
going to continue talking about binding
energies then go on to the verification
with a demo of how they how people were
able to show that there was good
agreement here all right so let's
continue with binding energies so we're
still talking about the hydrogen atom in
energy levels and we saw last time that
the Schrodinger equation could be
derived for a hydrogen atom such that
the binding energy or e to the n was
equal to minus this Redbird constant RH
over N squared where n is the principal
quantum number and so this is what we
saw last time and now we have a
graphical depiction of this and you'll
note that this is a negative value over
here so if n is 1 and we have the
principal quantum number of 1 we have
minus RH over 1 squared and so we just
have the negative value for the rigvir
constant 2.18 times 10 to the minus 18
joules and as we go up here in energy we
would get to an energy of 0 and if
energy here is 0 what must be true about
n what kind of number is in here
infinity right so if this is infinity
that number goes to 0 and so if the
electron is infinitely far away from the
nucleus it's basically it's a free
electron it doesn't feel any kind of
attraction it's infinitely far away then
your binding energy would be 0 ie it's
not bound and that would be true at this
infinitely far away
distance and then in between the N
equals 1 to N equals affinity we can use
this equation for the hydrogen atom to
figure out what these energy levels are
so when we have the N equals 2 state it
would be minus RH over 2 squared or 4
and so we can calculate what that number
is here minus 0.5 for 5 times 10 to the
minus 18 joules N equals 3 so we have
our H over 3 squared we can do the math
over here for you get the idea
minus RH over 4 squared and we have then
over 5 squared over 6 squared and you
can see the energy and you can calculate
the energy levels here all right so when
you have an electron in this N equals 1
state that's the lowest energy it's the
most negative number and that's known as
the ground state and when you have an
electron in this ground state that's the
most stable stable state for the
hydrogen atom so again from these lower
ground state up to this state here now
we're going to introduce another term
which you'll hear a lot and this is
ionization energy so the ionization
energy the amount of energy you need to
put in to ionize an atom or a release
and electron so the ionization energy of
a hydrogen atom in the enth state is
going to be equal to the binding energy
but the signs of these are going to be
different so we have this equation where
binding energy equals minus ie the
ionization energy so we talked about the
fact that the binding energy is negative
and the ionization energy is always
positive so for the binding energy when
the binding energy is zero it means the
elect
isn't found so a negative value for
binding energy means that the electrons
being held by the nucleus the electrons
bound for ionization energy that's the
energy you need to add to the system to
release the electron and you're always
going to need to add some energy so
that's a positive number so when you
think about ionization energy you're
going to be thinking about it's it's a
positive number that you're going to be
expecting there now we can consider this
same diagram and we already talked about
these energy levels and now we can think
about these in terms of ionization
energies as well so the difference from
this state where energy is 0 to the
ground state down here the ionization
energy the energy it's needed to ionize
an electron that's an N equals 1 here is
going to be equal to minus the binding
energy of that electron in that N equals
1 state so again here it's not too hard
if you know this information and this
equation to figure out what the
ionization energy is so that's just then
going to be the positive value of the
binding energy so binding energy minus
red Burke's constant here 2.18 times 10
to the minus 18 joules so the ionization
energy then for a hydrogen atom in the
ground state is positive two point one
eight zero times ten to the minus
eighteenth and I'm just going to try to
use the same number of significant
figures I always try to pay attention to
my significant figures all right so we
can do this again for for at the N
equals 2 state or the first excited
state so here's the N equals 2 state so
now we're going to be talking about this
differential energy here so the
ionization energy for an electron in
this first excited state again that will
be ionization energy equals minus the
binding energy for that state and so
that's gonna be then the positive value
here
so the binding energy
- if we do this in if we change this to
it
this is eighteen point five to the 18 or
five point zero to the minus 19 joules
try to keep the significant figures the
same all right so why don't you give
this a try now we'll have a clicker
question
okay ten more seconds
stop very long one second okay
interesting
so maybe you can talk to your neighbor
and and someone can tell me what the
trick is here
okay we have someone who's going to tell
us what the trick is the ground state is
N equals one and from there the excited
States go up one so the first excited
state is N equals two and then so the
third one will be N equals four and
since you're looking for the ionization
energy you go to the energy for N equals
four and you multiply by negative one
which is four zero point one four to the
negative great yeah so see what I have I
need to get some more stuff sorry okay
so the trick it's not a hard problem you
just had to figure out what the third
excited state meant so that was a good
extension we made that mistake you will
not make that one again all right so now
we can think about this also in more
general terms only kind of slightly more
general terms frankly which is to
consider for other one electron ions we
can have a more general equation so we
had for the hydrogen atom the the
binding energy en is minus red bursts
constant rh / N squared and now I've
added Z squared which is the atomic
number and for hydrogen it's one so it
wasn't it wasn't around we didn't need
it before but we can consider other ions
that also have one electron they will
also work with this equation so there's
a couple of things that kind of fall out
of this one that an electron is going to
be bound more weakly when N is a big
number here and so that that that makes
sense from what we were looking at
before and that an electron is also
going to be bound more tightly when Z
is big and we hadn't really talked about
that because we've just been talking
about the hydrogen atom and so it always
has the same Z but if you have a
difference II you're gonna have a bigger
positively charged nucleus and so it
sort of makes sense that you would then
have a tighter binding electron alright
so you might think what are other things
that have just one electron that this is
going to apply to and so far of course
we've just been talking about our friend
a hydrogen that has its one electron and
z equals one but we have ions that can
also have one electron so helium plus
and it has a z of two but when it's
helium plus it only has one electron
lithium plus two also only has one
electron and it has a Z of three and
then what about something that's a one
electron system with a plus 64 without
looking at your periodic table what does
the Z have to be here yeah so 65 so when
working these kinds of problems if
you're not if you're talking about a one
electron ion or atom and it's not
hydrogen don't forget about Z we need to
have that in our equation all right so
talking about these binding energies now
out of the Schrodinger equation you can
calculate ionization energies if you
know the binding energy all of this is
good but how do we know that we can
trust the Schrodinger equation that
those equations really are working so
the way that they figured this out is
from experiment and particularly
experimentally figuring out what the
energy levels were and and thinking you
know does this match with the
Schrodinger equation so they were able
to use photon admission to be able to do
this so let's let's consider what photon
admission is and then we're going to
prove that this equation that I've been
showing you actually holds so photon
admission
this is a situation that occurs when you
have an electron going from a higher
initial higher energy initial state
going to a lower energy state and as it
goes from this high energy state to the
low energy State
there's a difference between these two
energy states Delta e and that's going
to be equal to the higher energy initial
state minus the energy in the final
state so there's this difference in
energy between the two states and the
photon that gets admitted when this
energy transition happens has the same
energy as the difference between those
so the energy of the admitted photon is
also Delta e so you admit all of that
energy as you have that change so the
difference here we can consider an
actual kind of case where we're going
from an energy difference of N equals 6
to an energy a level of N equals 2 and
we can think about what the energy
difference is between these two and we
can just write that equation out so the
initial energy the electron started at N
equals 2 so the energy or N equals 6 the
energy of the N equals 6 state and it
goes to the energy of the N equals 2
state so in energy and equals 6 minus
energy n equals 2 all right so of course
if you know energy you can know a lot of
other things about the photon so you can
calculate frequency of that admitted
photon so again we have our energy
difference here and we can then solve
for the frequency of the admitted photon
which is equal to the energy difference
that energy divided by Planck's constant
and you could also write it out the
initial energy minus the final energy
over H all of these are equivalent
things
and from when you know frequency we're
talking about light here so you can
calculate the wavelength so let's think
now about what we might expect in terms
of frequencies and wavelengths depending
on the energy difference between the two
different states so here if we think
first about this electron with the
purple line we have a large energy
difference here between this state and
this state down here between N equals
five to N equals one so when we have a
large difference in energy what do we
expect about the frequency of the
emitted photon is it going to be a high
frequency or low frequency high yeah so
large energy high frequency and so then
what would be true about the wavelength
of that emitted photon short right now
if we had a small difference say N
equals 3 to N equals one which is a
smaller difference in energy what's true
about the frequency here right low
frequency and wavelength right long
wavelength all right so now we're
actually going to see some photons being
admitted and let me just kind of filled
in to this experiment a little bit so we
have we have a fill a vacuum filled with
hydrogen and if you have negative and
positive electrodes you can admit light
from this and then analyze the different
wavelengths so we are not going to be
the first people to see this but we're
going to try this and this is a we
should observe these different
wavelengths coming off and after we
observe them we will try to calculate
what they're due to and then
if this experiment if the experimental
results of the wavelengths and frequency
observed can be explained by the
Schrodinger equation but first let's
actually see the visible spectra that is
created by hydrogen and so we have our
demo tas and actually if all our TAS can
help pass out some little glasses to
help everyone see this and when we're
ready we're gonna do lights down but
let's get everything handed out first
alright here are the lights
so this is a hydrogen lamp and you turn
it on electricity excites all the
hydrogen's inside it and then you see
this glow from the electromagnetic
radiation being emitted by these excited
hydrogen's relaxing down to the ground
state
I'm gonna try there like
so we're gonna try this for those of you
who don't have the glasses but let's see
if this works it was kind of there is
that what they're supposed to see hey
you're supposed to see all of them I
guess you can't really it's depending on
how you move this thing
it's not working
we're not working
now
yeah I know I mean
kind of worse depending on how I believe
this thing
sometimes it works really well
- just try walking can we hold it up and
see whether people also can see all
right so we're gonna hold it up see if
you guys without the without the camera
okay so you should be able to see for
those of you that have your glasses is
the continuous spectrum with the various
colors
I might have to get the angle right they
say our people in the middle of the room
able to see it
can anyone can anyone see it yeah people
on the edge of the room can you see it I
think it's harder from when the camera
is blocking people a little bit it works
I can see it do you want to move it up
farther like in front of that
turn around
all right you will turn it slightly and
then people can we can come down maybe
and try it after class if it's not
working very well
when it's tilted are you having better
luck over here all right
all right I guess we'll bring the lights
back up and I'll show you what you sort
of seen if it didn't work for you so how
many how many people were able to see
see the spectra okay all right so a good
number of people great
I feel like this room is not as perfect
for this as some other rooms but there's
some rooms that actually don't get dark
at all and then you can't really see
anything
all right so maybe if you have a chance
we can try again at the end all right so
this is what you should have seen you
should have seen these different series
of lights our series of colors coming
off and this was we're not the first
people to see it so the ball JJ Balmer
in 1885 reported seeing these colors and
he wanted to calculate the frequencies
of the lights that he were seeing
admitted from this and so he did
calculate the frequency and then he
tried to figure out the mathematical
relationship between the different
frequencies of light that he was
observing and he found that the
frequency equaled 3.29 times 10 to the
minus r 10 to the 15th per second times
1 over 4 minus 1 over some number and
where n was either 3 4 or 5 and he
really didn't understand what the
significance of this was but it was
pretty you had a hydrogen in the sealed
tube and there were colors that came off
and they had frequencies so that's kind
of where where that stood for a little
while so now let's think about what
those different color lights were due to
so we have here energy levels and the
transitions that we were observing are
all going to the N equals 2 final state
and we can think about why
see any transitions to N equals one
think about that we'll come back to that
in a minute
but there were these different
transitions that were being observed
from three to two for two to five to two
and six to two so now let's think about
which colors which wavelengths are due
to which of the transitions so for the
red one what do you think three four or
five transition to two three
it is three and you could think about
that in terms of the smaller energy
that's the smallest energy so that would
be a low frequency and a long wavelength
so the one with the longest wavelength
and red is the longest wavelength so
that must be the transition from initial
end of three to N equals two and then we
can fill in the rest so this one over
here must have been N equals four to two
this one here then would be the blue N
equals five to two and then the purple
or indigo at the end N equals six to N
equals two so we saw they saw these four
colors there were these different
transitions and so then now we can
calculate what the frequencies of these
are and think about this then in terms
of Schrodinger's equation and kind of
test row dangers equation to see if it
predicts this so we can calculate the
frequency then of the admitted photons
and we had frequency equals the initial
energy minus the final energy state or
this Delta e over Planck's constant and
from the Schrodinger equation we know
about what these energy levels are from
Schrodinger and this is again for
hydrogen so Z equals one so these isn't
shown we have the binding energy equals
minus RH rid BER constant
and squared and now we can put these
equations together so we can substitute
these energies in using these and so we
can do that here we'll pull out Planck's
constant so one over H and then we can
substitute in - RH over the initial
enter the initial end level squared
minus - minus RH over the final n
squared and we can also simplify this a
little more pull out our H over here and
now we just have one over the final we
have minus a minus so we've rearranged
this one over n final squared minus 1
over n initial squared and we have an
equation that solves for the frequency
in terms of red burg Planck's constant
and what the principal quantum numbers
are what n is so let's look at this a
little more now remember this is all
going to and final of two and so we can
put that equation up here again so when
this is 2 2 squared is 4 and if you
remember back Balmer had a 4 had this
part of the expression but he had kind
of a strange number over here that he
experimentally determined but if you
take our H and divide by Planck's
constant rigvir constant divided by
Planck's you get that number that bomber
had found back in 1885 3.2 9 times 10 to
the 15th per second so when we plug in
the values from Schrodinger's equations
you come up with the experimentally
determined values for frequencies or
wavelength of the admitted light and of
course from the frequency you can
calculate the wavelength and the
wavelengths that were observed
experimentally agreed with a wavelength
you would
callate from the Schrodinger's equation
to one part in times 10 to the 8th so
the agreement was absolutely amazing
so Schrodinger's equation which was
taking into account the wave-like
properties of the electrons were able to
predict for a hydrogen atom
what wavelengths you should see admitted
in that hydrogen atom spectra so this
was really exciting Schrodinger equation
was working we had a way of describing
the behavior that we were observing for
these electrons and that was that was
really incredible and I think bombers
should get a lot of credit as well for
all of this and and the people who are
doing these early experiments they
didn't know what it was meaning but they
were coming up at the data that allowed
to test theories later on ok so this was
a series going to a final n of 2 and so
we have the Balmer series that was the
visible series that we were seeing so
what about why wasn't anything going to
N equals 1 and that's a clicker question
so at the end I'm going to ask you to
put up the winners
it's my number good okay ten more
seconds
okay
so seventy seventy one percent so the
trick here is to think about well
actually someone could tell me maybe
what was the trick here to think about I
get a little exercise okay oh come on
how's everyone doing up here so
therefore the Lyman series there's like
a more difference from the Balmer series
and so there's like more energy in the
transition when it goes down back to the
ground state so for that with more
energy it's gonna be a shorter way of
playing than that and that's ultraviolet
so here would be convenient to remember
kind of your orders of what are short
and long wavelength kinds of light okay
so we have the UV range then and so
that's why you didn't observe it it was
happening but you didn't see it because
it was in the UV alright so then we can
go on and look at the other things that
can happen here so we can have an final
of three and you don't need to know the
names of the series but that would be
near near IR N equals four would be in
the IR range so only some of what's
happening is actually visible to us we
see beautiful colors from transitions
but there's other things happening too
that are not visible to us so at this
point we're feeling pretty good about
those energy levels about the
Schrodinger equation being able to
successfully predict what kind of energy
levels you have that binding energy and
now that was from this this verification
was good from your photon emission but
there's another property that you can
have which is photon absorption so why
don't we do yet another clicker question
is a competition after all about
absorption
okay ten seconds okay
so now we're talking about a different
process we're talking before about
electrons they're starting up in a
higher energy level going lower
but with photon absorption we're going
the other direction so we're going from
a lower state we're being excited
they're absorbing energy and being
excited so we have a final state that is
higher and the energy is gained in this
process so it's being excited all right
so we can think about the same things
then in terms of absorption so if we
have a big energy difference if it's
absorbing a lot of energy big energy
difference it's going to be absorbing
light with a high frequency and a short
wavelength if there's a small energy
difference it'll absorb a photon with a
low frequency or a long wavelength and
we'll come back to some of these ideas
actually well into the course and we'll
actually look at some pretty colors so
in this case now we can calculate
frequency again but our equation is a
little bit different so we have the
Redbird constant and Planck's constant
again but now we have 1 over initial n
squared minus final n squared and so
this term should be a positive term we
should be getting out a positive
frequency so if I take this again and
just kind of put it up here you want to
think about whether you're if you're
talking about absorption or admission
that's what's telling you if the energy
is being gained or lost so you're not
going to have negative frequencies in
one case you're gonna be absorbing a
light of a particular frequency or
admitting light of a frequency so pay
attention to your equations and think
about whether your answer actually makes
sense when you do them and again all
these equations are going to be provided
to you in an equation sheet ok so let's
consider the sort of summary of both
these things now so we're talking about
admission versus absorption and so we
have this Rydberg formula which is what
this is called and it can be used to
calculate the frequency of either
admitted admitted photons or absorbed
photons so from either process and if we
want to make it more general again it's
just a one electron case but we can put
our Z in for any one electron ion so
frequency equals Z squared
Redbird constant over Planck's constant
and we have one over final the final
minus initial or initial minus final
depending on which process you're
talking about and over here where you'd
be talking then about admission so our
initial our initial energy is higher
going to lower and when that happens
you're going to be releasing light with
the enter energy difference that is due
to the difference between these states
so we're gonna have our electron it's
going to admit this energy in the
absorption process for this equation
we're gonna go from a initial state
that's lower to a higher state so our
our final will have a final state that's
higher than initial that's absorption
it's absorbing energy it's getting
excited and so the electron is absorbing
that energy so this really kind of
summarizes now what we need to know
about binding energies Schrodinger
equation also tells us about wave
functions which is what we're moving
into next so that's all for today except
we have a very important announcement
which is congratulation to recitation
six Lisa you are the first winner of the
clicker competition
have a great weekend everybody